House of Commons International Development Committee

Oral evidence: Humanitarian situation in Gaza, HC 373

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Tuesday 12 November 2024

Ordered by the House of Commons to be published on 12 November 2024.

Members present: Sarah Champion (Chair); Monica Harding; Laura Kyrke-Smith;
Noah Law; Alice Macdonald; Brian Mathew; Gordon McKee; David Reed; Sam
Rushworth; David Taylor.

Questions 1-64

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Witnesses

I: Professor Nizam Mamode, Professor of transplant surgery.

II: Emina Ćerimović, Associate Director, Disability Rights Division, Human
Rights Watch, Nebal Farsakh, Spokesperson, Palestine Red Crescent, Sam Rose,
Senior Deputy Director for UNRWA Affairs in Gaza and Rohan Talbot, Director of
Advocacy and Campaigns, Medical Aid for Palestinians.

Examination of witness

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Witness: Professor Nizam Mamode.

Q1                Chair: I would like to start the very first session of the
International Development Committee. It is a new Committee that we have for
this new Parliament, and it is my great honour that our first witness is
Professor Nizam Mamode. He is a professor of transplant surgery, but he is in
front of us because he has recently returned from Gaza, having done some work
in the hospitals over there. We really appreciate you coming and speaking to us
today. It is obviously difficult to get first-hand testimony about what is
going on in Gaza at the moment, so thank you for coming and sharing your
experiences. I wonder if you could properly introduce yourself and say what you
were doing out there and when you came back.

Professor Mamode: I am no longer a professor of transplant surgery. I retired
from the NHS a couple of years ago and have spent my time doing work overseas.
I had a month in Gaza mid-August to mid-September working in Nasser hospital
with Medical Aid for Palestinians. I am happy to tell you about my experiences
there.

Q2                Chair: Please do. When did you go? Why did you go?

Professor Mamode: Why did I go? Because I thought I had the skillset that could
help. When I was sitting in the convoy going across the border, I did have
second thoughts, but it was too late then to get out of the convoy. When we
crossed the border, the first thing was a complete sense of shock.

Q3                Chair: What did you see? What did you smell?

Professor Mamode: The landscape reminded me of Hiroshima and Nagasaki:
devastation and buildings reduced to rubble for miles around, as far as you
could see. Nothing growing, no people, a  few looters here and there—nothing.
You drive through that for about 20 minutes, and then you get to the central
part of southern Gaza, which was designated the green zone—I cannot bring
myself to call it the safe zone or humanitarian zone, because it was neither.
That green zone houses about 1.3 million people.

Q4                Chair: What sort of area is that?

Professor Mamode: It is probably about the size of the City of London. You
could walk across it fairly easily, if it was safe to do so. A large part of it
comprises tents. When I say tents, some of those are proper tents, but many of
them are just pieces of carpet and plastic stuck on to sticks. These are in the
middle of the road, at the side of the road, in every possible space. There is
no running water, no sanitation, and no electricity, obviously. People are
having to roll those tents up and move on at very, very short notice time and
time again. Most people have moved six or seven times.

Q5                Chair: What does it sound and smell like?

Professor Mamode: Well, the sound is mainly of two things. One is
drones—constant drones. The drones existed before October last year; they have
been a feature of Palestinian life for some time, but now the drones inspire
fear, I think—they inspired fear in me. When I used to debate sleeping outside
on the stairs or inside in a very crowded hot room, part of that decision was
whether the drones had the ability to pick me off when I was on the stairs—

Q6                Chair: Do you mean identify you?

Professor Mamode: No, shoot me. That is what they do. Those drones are
surveillance drones, but they are also drones that shoot people regularly. I
can tell you more about some of the people I have operated on who experienced
that. So you have this constant whine, which is psychologically very affecting
because it represents danger and is constantly there. The other sound that you
hear is bombs. They were going off every hour or two throughout the month that
I was there.

We spent the whole month in the hospital. We deemed it not safe to travel. We
were aware that there was a curfew, so we wanted to be in the hospital if
casualties arrived at night. We did have a guest house, but we did not want to
stay there, partly because of the travel, but also because one of the MAP guest
houses had been bombed in January this year, so we stayed in the hospital. A
missile strike or an artillery shell would explode in the vicinity and the
whole building would shake and windows would rattle. You would look out the
window or run outside to see how close it was. It was a constant feature of
life.

We felt we were relatively safe, because we thought it unlikely that there
would be a direct strike on the hospital. But those 1.3 million, 1.4 million
people in the green zone were constantly being bombed, day and night. What I
found particularly disturbing was that a bomb would drop, maybe on a crowded,
tented area, then the drones would come down and—

Chair: Please take your time. We are incredibly grateful that you are making
the time to be here today. I can only imagine just how it has impacted you and
will continue to impact you—you cannot unsee what you have seen—but you being
able to share that with us really helps us to hold legislators, in particular,
to account. So we appreciate the time that you are making for us today. Thank
you.

Professor Mamode: The drones would come down and pick off civilians—children.
We had description after description. This is not an occasional thing. This was
day after day after day of operating on children who would say, “I was lying on
the ground after a bomb had dropped, and this quadcopter came down and hovered
over me and shot me.” That is clearly a deliberate and persistent act; there
was persistent targeting of civilians day after day. We had one or two mass
casualty incidents every day, which meant 10 to 20 dead and 20 to 40 seriously
injured. A hospital like Guy’s and St Thomas’, where I used to work, might get
one or two a year. We had one or two a day, and 60% to 70% of the people we
treated were women and children.

Q7                Chair: I am sorry to do this, but I will draw you a little.
You said “children”. Could you tell us the ages of the children? You said that
they said they were lying on the ground from a bomb shock. Do you believe them?

Professor Mamode: Oh yes, absolutely. A seven-year-old is not going to make up
a story.

Q8                Chair: So we are talking about little children, not late
teens.

Professor Mamode: The majority of the children who were casualties were young
children, but we had casualties in their teens and women in their ’30s. It was
a very consistent story, and the story would be given as soon as they came into
the emergency department, so I have absolutely no reason to doubt this.

The bullets that the drones fire are these small cuboid pellets. I fished a
number of those out of the abdomens of small children. I think the youngest I
operated on was a three-year-old who had a major injury to the artery in her
neck. We used the last shunt—which is a device you use to bypass the artery in
the neck to keep supplying blood to the brain—in the hospital, because those
kinds of things are just not available. She died about three or four days later
from an infection.

Q9                Chair: Do you believe it was deliberate targeting of
civilians?

Professor Mamode: There is absolutely no question in my mind. It has been the
experience of so many healthcare workers who have documented it time and time
and time again. My personal experience and that of my colleagues was that this
was clearly persistent, deliberate targeting of civilians. I have worked in a
number of conflict zones in different parts of the world—I was there at the
time of the Rwandan genocide—and I have never seen anything on this scale,
ever. That was also the view of all the experienced colleagues I worked with.
One of the surgeons in my team had been to Ukraine five times and said, “This
is 10 times worse.”

Normally, in a conflict zone, you would have a frontline; you would have
fighting going on between two sets of forces, and you might get some civilians
injured in that exchange. There does not seem to be a frontline; there just
seem to be 1.4 million people trapped—they cannot leave—having bombs dropped on
them on a daily basis, and then drones coming in and shooting them. There is
plenty of evidence out there from Israeli soldiers that that is what is going
on, but we saw the results of it.

Q10            Laura Kyrke-Smith: You talked about a child dying of an
infection that they caught. We know that the supplies getting in are extremely
limited and are less now than they have been in the past. Can you talk a bit
about the challenges that you face because of the lack of supplies? How does
that manifest itself when you are trying to do your medical work?

Professor Mamode: I remember, one Saturday night, operating on an
eight-year-old who was bleeding to death. I asked for a swab and they said, “No
more swabs.” We had operations being done with no sterile gloves or no sterile
drapes at various points. We had a lack of basic equipment. I did amputations
on people who just had to take paracetamol after the operation as pain relief.

That medical aid was sitting at the border and not being allowed in. We were
not allowed to take any medical equipment, except for personal use. I was asked
if I could bring thyroid medication for some people; I could not take it in.
That is a deliberate policy. That has changed, because I know that teams
earlier in the year had been able to take some medical equipment in. So that
seems to me to be a deliberate restriction of medical supplies.

Basic things like soap and shampoo are also not being allowed in. I do not know
how many wounds I saw with maggots in; one of my colleagues took maggots out of
a child’s throat in intensive care. There were flies in the operating theatre,
landing in the wounds. It was appalling, and that is a deliberate choice—it is
not an accident.

Q11            Laura Kyrke-Smith: In the light of those challenges, how did you
attempt to manage sterilisation and infection?

Professor Mamode: You just do the best you can. But a large number of our
patients—perhaps the majority; I don’t know—would survive the operation and die
of infections afterwards.

There was a doctor in his 30s who worked in intensive care in the hospital. He
got hepatitis A, which is a disease of poor hygiene. It is a disease for which
there is a vaccination. I have been vaccinated; he did not have access to the
vaccine. He became unwell; he became a patient in his own ITU. He did not have
the treatment that he could have had in a proper environment, and he died in
his own ITU. We asked for him to be evacuated, but he wasn’t.

Q12            Chair: It sounds medieval, what you are describing.

Professor Mamode: Yes, undoubtedly. Remember that Nasser hospital, at the time
I was there, was probably the best hospital in Gaza; most other hospitals did
not have the facilities and the equipment that Nasser had. Nasser was barely
functioning as a hospital and was being run by staff, many of whom had very
little experience, because so many medical staff have been detained or killed,
and some have left when they were able to leave. Intensive care, for example,
was run, basically, by general practitioners who had had very minimal training.
The cost in life and in suffering from that side of things is very substantial,
because you do not have the equipment, you do not have the staff and you do not
have the facilities.

Even in terms of getting access to the hospital, while I was there an ambulance
was shot at—there were several bullet holes in the windscreen—while it was
going to pick up casualties. I think there are something like 163 or more
documented examples of ambulances being targeted, so many people never got an
ambulance. People would carry casualties in; sometimes they would bring them in
on donkey carts. When a mass casualty incident happened, we would have the
whole emergency department full. People would be lying on the floor in pools of
blood, and it would be a case of trying to decide who was alive; who was alive
and might survive, with some treatment; and who could wait a bit. That was
pretty much every day. That has been going on for a very long time now.

Chair: The information you are giving is throwing us, but we are glad that you
are giving it to us.

Q13            Alice Macdonald: Yes, thank you; it is very powerful testimony.
You mentioned at the beginning that about 60% of the people you were seeing
were women and children. Can you expand a little more on the effects on women
and children—for example, presumably there would be pregnant women coming
in—and the challenges you were seeing, particularly when it comes to those two
groups of vulnerable people?

Professor Mamode: I would not want to be pregnant in Gaza at the moment. We did
not deal directly with women giving birth; that was dealt with elsewhere, so we
had no experience of that. You would have people with blast injuries, abdominal
injuries, chest injuries, limbs blown off, head injuries. We saw a number of
children with sniper injuries—a single shot to the head, but no other injuries;
so clearly deliberately targeted by Israeli snipers. That was day after day.

Q14            Alice Macdonald: In terms of the horrendous things you are
describing—drone targeting and snipers, as you just mentioned—is there a way to
bring that together? In the same way that you are sharing this evidence with us
here now, was that shared back on the ground, in different ways, with different
people?

Professor Mamode: Do you mean with people in Gaza?

Chair: You mean how it is documented?

Q15            Alice Macdonald: Yes—if it is possible to do that.

Professor Mamode: It is not really. The emergency department is chaos, most of
the time. There are no medical notes any more. There would literally be little
scraps of paper that people would write something on, saying “Had an
amputation. Come back in a week, on discharge”. That was the extent of it. I
think they documented the admissions, but collecting detailed statistics about
causes of particular trauma is difficult.

As you probably know, there has been a letter from 32 doctors and nurses from
the UK, who wrote to the Prime Minister back in September—they had all worked
in Gaza, and some had overlapped with me—and also one from 99 in the US, who
wrote to Biden in October, saying exactly the same things. This is not a
surprise. It is something that I am sure senior politicians are well aware of.

Q16            Sam Rushworth: What was the balance that you were seeing between
people whose injuries and suffering were caused directly by the
conflict—bullets, bombs, shrapnel and so on—versus disease, hunger and other
types of illness that were caused by living in those conditions?

Professor Mamode: There were a lot of people with those problems. As a surgeon,
I saw them only peripherally coming through. On a daily basis, there would be
several people coming to the emergency department with diabetic ketoacidosis,
for example. Those would be diabetics who did not have access to insulin, so
they would develop a diabetic coma. You have to go back to the ’30s or ’40s in
this country for that to happen. Insulin needs to be kept in a fridge. If you
are living in a tent, how do you store it? How do you even get hold of it?

There were lots of those examples. Colleagues who were working in primary care
described huge amounts of infectious disease, particularly among children. We
certainly saw malnourished children, and I think that is just getting worse and
worse now. And then, of course, there are all the other, if you like, normal
conditions. We came across people with bowel cancer. They got an operation but
it was not a curative operation, because there is no chemotherapy and no
radiotherapy. So all the ancillary services that existed before the war—they
had some very good hospitals with very good facilities and very good staff—have
all gone. They have been destroyed, so there is a huge uncounted cost to the
war.

A paper in The Lancet in July estimated—because of the casualties that have
been counted, those who were likely to be under the rubble and all those who
were dying from other diseases as a result of the war—conservatively 186,000
dead. Those were the figures up to June, so, to my mind, it is over 200,000
now.

Q17            Monica Harding: You talked about colleagues who had been
detained and killed. Can you give us an idea of how many colleagues you were
working with in the hospital?

Professor Mamode: Do you mean Palestinian colleagues?

Monica Harding: Yes, local colleagues.

Professor Mamode: There were quite a few. I would have to guess that there were
about 20 to 25 doctors in the hospital—maybe more, I don’t know. But there were
many, many more before the war. Many of the doctors I was working with had been
in the north and had fled the north, and were now making up the numbers in the
south.

Q18            Monica Harding: You also talked about ambulances being targeted.
Did you feel safe?

Professor Mamode: I felt relatively safe in the sense that I thought it was
unlikely that they would drop a 2,000 lb bomb directly on the hospital, but we
were worried about drones and could not leave the hospital. Travelling in and
out was probably the most nerve-racking thing. We travelled in and out on a UN
convoy in armoured vehicles, and that has been shot at five times by the
Israelis. These convoys are very carefully organised. They follow a
predetermined route given to them by the Israeli army. There is a radio check
at the start before they leave, during the journey and at the end, so the
Israeli army know that they are there and where they are. Despite that, they
have been shot at five times, including while we were there. My biggest fear
while I was there was being killed by the Israelis.

Q19            Chair: When the convoys were shot at, was this by a rogue
sniper, or was this—

Professor Mamode: No, this is the Israeli army coming up as a unit and
deliberately shooting.

Q20            Chair: A UN convoy?

Professor Mamode: Yes. The last one when I was there, I think, would have been
about the end of August. It was reported that some WHO staff—these are armoured
vehicles, so you can see four or five bullet marks in the window, just where
someone would have been sitting. We were given very clear instructions: “The
doors are going to be locked when you set off. Do not unlock the doors if the
Israeli army shoot at you and order you out. Do not get out of the vehicle”.
This is a UN convoy—it has “UN” in big letters on the side—and twice a week, it
carries about 30 to 40 aid workers from different organisations in and out. A
huge number of aid workers have been targeted, and that is well documented.
Again, to my mind, that is deliberate.

Q21            Brian Mathew: Can I ask a question about the drone thing
specifically? When they are shooting at people, are these single shots or
machine guns? Are they targeting individual people with a one-off shot? How
does it happen?

Professor Mamode: Luckily, I was never anywhere near a drone firing, so I can
only comment on what we saw when people came in. We would see people with
sometimes a single entry point, sometimes two or three. What we did see on one
or two occasions was a very disturbing pattern where there would be three or
four shots on each side of the chest, and again in the groin. That, we all
thought, was prima facie evidence of an autonomous or semi-autonomous drone,
because a human operator would not be able to fire with that degree of accuracy
that quickly. There is some documentation that such drones were going to be
used—it was reported in Haaretz back in April. That was particularly
disturbing, but most of the drone injuries we saw were one, two or sometimes
three shots.

These drone pellets were, in a way, more destructive than bullets. If you are
shot in the chest with a bullet, if it misses your heart and goes on the other
side, it can go through your lung and out the back, and you will probably
survive. With the drone pellets, what I found is that they would go in and they
would bounce around, so they would cause multiple injuries. I had a
seven-year-old boy, the one who I described clearly earlier. He had an entry
point on his side. He came in with his stomach hanging out of his chest, and he
had an injury to his liver, spleen, bowel, arteries, so quite extensive
destruction from a single entry point. He survived that and went out a week
later. Whether he is still alive, I do not know.

Chair: Thank you for trying.

Q22            Gordon McKee: Thank you very much, Nizam, for coming in front of
the Committee. It is incredibly valuable to hear your testimony. In the four
months I have been an MP, I do not think I have heard anything as harrowing as
what you are describing. I really appreciate you coming in front of us. I
realise this is a difficult question to answer, but I wonder if you could give
an estimation of how many lives could be saved, protected, by aid that is
currently sitting at the border crossing? What is the difference on the ground
that you feel that aid, which is literally being stopped, could make?

Professor Mamode: It could make a huge difference. I have never been in a
conflict area where medical aid has been restricted to that extent—not allowing
supplies in, bombing healthcare facilities, attacking ambulances, killing
healthcare workers. If all of that did not happen, tens of thousands of lives
would be saved. I would think that any army that is engaged in a war has a
responsibility to the civilian population on both sides. I am seeing the
opposite there.

Q23            Gordon McKee: From your experience and your colleagues’
experiences, how different is this from other conflict zones? You gave even the
example of Ukraine and how different this is from a normal conflict zone in
medical terms.

Professor Mamode: It is completely different, in every respect. I think that
was a recurring theme from everybody—from people working for the UN, the WHO,
doctors, everybody. The International Committee of the Red Cross were there
with a field hospital. Most of the time in a conflict zone, the civilian
population can move and get away from it. They may have to walk a long distance
and suffer doing that. This is the equivalent of just putting a blockade around
the city of London, saying you cannot leave, and then dropping bombs month
after month and then closing down all the healthcare facilities. That is what
is happening. It is astonishing that it is continuing. We all found that it was
beyond belief that this could continue.

Q24            Chair: Do you regard what you saw as genocide?

Professor Mamode: I am not an international human rights lawyer, so I cannot
talk about the absolute definitions, but it is difficult to find another word
for it given what we have seen. I certainly think that the Palestinian people
feel that that is what is happening to them, and there is a sense of
resignation that they are all just waiting to die with no chance of escape. So,
in a word, yes.

Q25            Chair: The Israelis would say that they are dropping leaflets
warning people to move to different areas, so that it is not targeted at
civilians. What are your thoughts on that?

Professor Mamode: First, they are supposedly not targeting the green zone, but
most of our casualties were from the green zone and many of them had no
evacuation, and no warning at all—a bomb would just drop. We had a vehicle
blown up five metres from the emergency department in the main street; we
certainly did not get any warning, and if I had been crossing the road to buy
something, that would have been the end of me.

In terms of evacuation orders, the way it works is they normally send a message
out to all mobile phones saying, “Area number whatever, evacuation order”—so if
you have a mobile phone, and it is charged and working, which is not that easy
if you are in a tent, then you have a chance. But the bombing typically would
start sometimes minutes, sometimes hours later. I was on a ward round one
morning with one of the Palestinian doctors who worked very closely with me,
and he suddenly looked at his phone and said he had to go. He ran out of the
hospital and ran to find the tent where his wife, his two young children—the
youngest of whom was one and a half—and his father were living, and they had to
pack up the tent and walk for miles to find somewhere else, all the while
thinking that at any moment a bomb might drop. That is the day-to-day reality
for all those people.

Q26            Monica Harding: You have talked about the day-to-day reality,
and children being targeted, and healthcare workers being killed, and about a
sense of resignation that civilians think they will die. Can you give a sense
of what they think about the international community—do they think at all about
what we can do?

Professor Mamode: They were very pleased to hear that I had spoken to some MPs
last week. When I messaged colleagues there and said, “This is what I am doing,
but I don’t know if it will make much difference,” they said, “Small steps”. I
think they feel abandoned by the international community; some still hope
something might happen, and I think they hugely appreciated the fact that
people were coming to help them and stand by them. That was one of the main
reasons for going.

Q27            David Reed: Thank you for coming and speaking to us, and for
having the strength to share your experiences. I know how difficult that must
be. Going back to the point around targeting, was there a threat that the
Israeli Defence Force was seeing? Was Hamas in the community? Could you see
where it was?

Professor Mamode: I am laughing because this is a question I asked when I got
there. I asked, “Is Hamas in the hospital? Have they been in the hospital?”
They just laughed at me. They said, “There is no Hamas. There are a few
fighters hiding in tunnels, but there is no Hamas; there never was any Hamas in
the hospital”. Everybody hates Hamas, and we never saw any evidence in the
street or in the hospital. I have been in conflict zones before, and normally,
if fighters come in, they come in with guns, or with their friends with guns.
We never saw any of that. We were allowed to go wherever we wanted in the
hospital, and there might have been a tunnel underneath—who knows?—but if Hamas
were coming and going in the hospital, it would have been fairly evident, and
they probably would have been kicked out by the people who work there.

I remember something they described, with ironic laughter, from when Nasser
hospital was attacked by the Israelis in February, and the Israelis killed a
number of staff and put them in a mass grave along with a number of patients.
That is well documented. They described one of their colleagues who was taken
away, detained along with a number of others and killed in detention. They said
he was an atheist and he hated Hamas, and before the war he was vociferous
about those things. He thought Islam was stupid and Hamas was stupid. They took
him away and killed him. That is what is going on. As far as I can see, it does
not matter who you are in Gaza. If you are Palestinian, you are a target.

Q28            David Taylor: Following on from what Laura and Gordon were
asking you, what particular types of medical supplies would you say, in the
circumstances, are the highest priority to get in at this point?

Professor Mamode: Basic medical supplies. Adequate things like gauze swabs,
gowns, gloves, antibiotics, painkillers—all those basic things. Those are
essential, but beyond that you need all the other ancillary things. You need
catheters to put into people, specialist imaging techniques and so on. I have
been a transplant surgeon for most of my career, so I know quite a bit about
dialysis. Every morning, on the balcony of our accommodation in the hospital, I
would look across to a building that had been the new dialysis centre, built by
Kuwaitis, as I understand it. The building is 100 metres away. It is burned
out, with no shell damage, no bullet holes; there was no firefight there. The
Israelis went in and burned it out. So now they have six or seven dialysis
machines for, essentially, the whole of southern Gaza. If you have kidney
failure and you do not have dialysis, you die, so to my mind that is just not
acceptable.

Q29            Noah Law: Thank you, Professor Mamode, for sharing these
harrowing experiences. You spoke about the information that the defence forces
have. On the point of being targeted as medical professionals, did you ever get
a sense of the motivation behind some of those attacks, or is that far away and
distant for you?

Professor Mamode: In terms of targeting foreign aid workers, there was, for
example, the bombing of the MAP guest house in January. One of the surgeons who
was with me was there at the time. A missile landed within the grounds, in
front of the house, at six in the morning. Some people were injured; luckily,
no one was killed. All those guest houses are in the Israeli army’s
computers—they are designated as “safe houses”—so my assumption is that it was
a deliberate attack and that the aim behind it was to discourage aid workers
from coming. I think it is the same as the shooting at the US convoys.

In terms of attacking hospitals and ambulances and so on, to my mind it cannot
be anything other than collective punishment. It is just a consistent attempt
to essentially wipe out a large part of the population. The thing that comes
through again and again when you talk to people is the humiliation, the
aggression. I was operating on a young girl one night who died not long
afterwards. I cannot even begin to describe her injuries. When I had finished
operating on her, an ophthalmologist was trying to take out her left eye, which
was just pulp. He was a lovely, gentle man, maybe five years older than me, and
while he was working, he was just saying, “Yeah, when they came in February,
they got all of us who were still here and put our hands behind our backs, tied
them up, put a hood over our heads, made us stand for 10 hours, beat us, cursed
us in Arabic—humiliated us.” Then some were taken away, some were killed, some
were detained, some were released.

We had a medical student who worked with us who described how the women had all
been lined up, told to strip down to their underwear and made to stand for
hours like that, which is deeply, deeply humiliating, particularly in that
culture. When they told her she could go, they would not give her clothes back,
so she had to run through the streets like that, which was extremely traumatic
for her. There is a consistent theme of attack, humiliation and aggression
against people who are simply trying to do their job and trying to help people
in the worst possible circumstances.

Q30            Chair: You said “they” did this to the medics. Who?

Professor Mamode: The Israeli army.

Q31            Laura Kyrke-Smith: You were in Nasser hospital, I think you
said.

Professor Mamode: Yes.

Laura Kyrke-Smith: The situation in north Gaza is getting more attention now
for how awful it is. Did you have any contact with medical professionals trying
to work in the north of the country?

Professor Mamode: No, only in the sense that there was a group of Jordanian
doctors sharing the accommodation with us, and three of them said, “We’re going
to try and get into the north,” and they got turned back at what is essentially
a border now, and were not allowed in. But that was in August, when things were
nothing like they are now.

Q32            Alice Macdonald: Going back to the effect on children, in other
conflicts children have been able to be medically evacuated and sent elsewhere
for treatment. Was that something that you were advocating for in the hospital
you were working in? Did you see it happen? If it didn’t, do you think that is
something that could be pushed further?

Professor Mamode: I don’t think it is a solution. There are a tiny number of
people who get evacuated for medical care. If you were to do it, in terms of
need it would be thousands going every month—literally. What is not picked up
by a lot of the statistics is children who have had both legs blown off—people
who have ongoing problems as a result. When I left, the WHO was trying to
construct a tented area within the hospital grounds just to deal with
constructing prosthetic limbs for people who had lost limbs in the war. It is a
huge number. One of the acronyms that is now used in Gaza is for “wounded child
no surviving family”. You have so many children who come in as a result of a
missile strike and all their relatives have been killed. Eventually somebody
pitches up and says, “I’m a cousin. I managed to come from a different part of
Gaza.” What is happening to the children is appalling.

Chair: Professor Mamode, I cannot express my gratitude and that of the
Committee for your coming here today and for the work that you have done. If
you could express our deep thanks to your colleagues who are doing the same
work, day in, day out, we would be grateful. Please assure them that you have
spoken to us, that we have heard, and that we will do all we can to act on your
profound testimony. We will make sure that it is heard by everybody who is in a
position to make changes to the horrific situation that you have described so
eloquently to us. Thank you so much for your time. I do appreciate it.

Professor Mamode: Thank you.
